Editorial rework of streams sections (#1950)
quicwg/base-drafts: draft-ietf-quic-transport.md

# Streams {#streams}

<!-- TODO: Replace bytes with octets -->

Streams in QUIC provide a lightweight, ordered byte-stream abstraction to an
application. An alternative view of QUIC streams is as an elastic "message"
abstraction, similar to the way ephemeral streams are used in SST

> {{?SST=DOI.10.1145/1282427.1282421}}, which may be a more appealing description

Reviewer: SST is a very dense description that may not be very helpful as an introduction for most users.

for some applications.

> QUIC does not provide any means of ensuring ordering between octets on different

Reviewer: ```suggestion
QUIC does not provide any means of ensuring ordering between bytes on different
```

> streams.

Reviewer 2: Too early for this concept.

Streams can be created by sending data. Other processes associated with stream
management - ending, cancelling, and managing flow control - are all designed to
impose minimal overheads. For instance, a single STREAM frame ({{frame-stream}})
can open, carry data for, and close a stream. Streams can also be long-lived and
can last the entire duration of a connection.

QUIC allows for an arbitrary number of streams to operate concurrently and for
an arbitrary amount of data to be sent on any stream, subject to flow control

> constraints (see {{flow-control}}).

Reviewer 2: Maybe the inter-stream ordering belongs here.

> constraints (see {{flow-control}}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
constraints (see {{flow-control}}) and a 62-bit stream offset limit.
```

## Stream Types and Identifiers {#stream-id}

> <!-- Stream ID or stream ID -->

Reviewer 2: the latter.  We're using capitalization for field names, not concepts.

Streams can be unidirectional or bidirectional.  Unidirectional streams carry
data in one direction: from the initiator of the stream to its peer.
Bidirectional streams allow for data to be sent in both directions.  Streams can
be created by either endpoint, can concurrently send data interleaved with other

> streams, and can be cancelled.  Any stream can be initiated by either enndpoint.

Reviewer 2: This might be better before the header.  Concentrating this bit on identifiers might be easier.

Streams are identified within a connection by a numeric value, referred to as

> the Stream ID.  Stream IDs are unique to a stream: a QUIC endpoint MUST NOT

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the Stream ID.  Stream IDs are unique to a stream. A QUIC endpoint MUST NOT
```

reuse a Stream ID within a connection.  Stream IDs are encoded as a
variable-length integer (see {{integer-encoding}}).

The least significant bit (0x1) of the Stream ID identifies the initiator of the
stream.  Client-initiated streams have even-numbered Stream IDs (with the bit
set to 0), and server-initiated streams have odd-numbered Stream IDs (with the
bit set to 1).

The second least significant bit (0x2) of the Stream ID distinguishes between
bidirectional streams (with the bit set to 0) and unidirectional streams (with
the bit set to 1).

The least significant two bits from a Stream ID therefore identify a stream as
one of four types, as summarized in {{stream-id-types}}.

| Bits | Stream Type                      |
|:-----|:---------------------------------|
| 0x0  | Client-Initiated, Bidirectional  |
| 0x1  | Server-Initiated, Bidirectional  |
| 0x2  | Client-Initiated, Unidirectional |
| 0x3  | Server-Initiated, Unidirectional |
{: #stream-id-types title="Stream ID Types"}

> Within each type, streams are expected to be created with numerically increasing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Within each type, streams are created with numerically increasing
```

> Stream IDs.  A Stream ID that is used out of order results in all streams of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Stream IDs.  A stream opened an out of order Stream ID results in all streams of
```
(using a stream does not necessarily imply opening it, and therefore also not lower numbered streams)

error of type PROTOCOL_VIOLATION.

Streams are an ordered byte-stream abstraction with no other structure that is
visible to QUIC. STREAM frame boundaries are not expected to be preserved when
data is transmitted, when data is retransmitted after packet loss, or when data
is delivered to the application at a receiver.

An endpoint MUST NOT send data on any stream without ensuring that it is within
the flow control limits set by its peer.  Flow control is described in detail in
{{flow-control}}.

## Stream Prioritization {#stream-prioritization}

Stream multiplexing can have a significant effect on application performance if
resources allocated to streams are correctly prioritized.

QUIC does not provide frames for exchanging prioritization information.  Instead
it relies on receiving priority information from the application that uses QUIC.

A QUIC implementation SHOULD provide ways in which an application can indicate
the relative priority of streams.  When deciding which streams to dedicate
resources to, the implementation SHOULD use the information provided by the
application.  Failure to account for priority of streams can result in

> suboptimal application performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
suboptimal application performance, and potentially starvation or deadlocks.
```

> # Stream States: Life of a Stream {#stream-states}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Stream States {#stream-states}
```

stream because the opening of either send or receive sides causes the stream
to open in both directions.

> 

Reviewer: I'm not sure how to formulate this, but there is a difference between the endpoints and view, including the state machine, and the overall distributed view: A stream can only be opened by the initiator, but the first materialized view of a frame can be receiver side sending a packet to a bidi stream. This does not mean that the receiver is opening the stream, but to the receiver it looks like the stream is being opened (although it already knows that is is open from receiving a higher valued Stream ID).

In short, I think it is wrong to state that receive side can open a stream, but the correct formulation is not clear to me.

Author: Fair point, though as you note, it's not clear exactly what to replace this with. Feel free to suggest a PR for it if you come up with something here.

An endpoint can open streams up to its maximum stream limit in any order of
stream ID. However, within each type, endpoints SHOULD open the send side of

> streams in numerically increasing order of stream ID.

Reviewer 2: I think that this text was rotten to begin with.  There might be a simpler statement.

"An endpoint MUST open streams of the same type in increasing order of stream ID."

> 

Reviewer: Perhaps a note here on loose coupling between application stream handles and QUIC internal stream ID's?

{: #fig-stream-recv-states title="States for Receive Streams"}

The receiving part of a stream initiated by a peer (types 1 and 3 for a client,
or 0 and 2 for a server) is created when the first STREAM, STREAM_DATA_BLOCKED,
RST_STREAM, or MAX_STREAM_DATA (bidirectional only, see below) is received for
that stream.  The initial state for a receive stream is "Recv".

The receive stream enters the "Recv" state when the sending part of a
bidirectional stream initiated by the endpoint (type 0 for a client, type 1 for
a server) enters the "Ready" state.

An endpoint opens a bidirectional stream when a MAX_STREAM_DATA frame is
received from the peer for that stream.  Receiving a MAX_STREAM_DATA frame for
an unopened stream indicates that the remote peer has opened the stream and is
providing flow control credit.  A MAX_STREAM_DATA frame might arrive before a
STREAM or STREAM_DATA_BLOCKED frame if packets are lost or reordered.

Before creating a stream, all streams of the same type with lower-numbered
stream IDs MUST be created.  This means that receipt of a frame that would open
a stream causes all streams of the same type with lower-numbered stream IDs to

> be opened in numeric order.  This ensures that the creation order for streams is

Reviewer 2: Drop the middle sentence of this paragraph.

A sender MUST NOT send any of these frames from a terminal state ("Data Recvd"
or "Reset Recvd").  A sender MUST NOT send STREAM or STREAM_DATA_BLOCKED after
sending a RST_STREAM; that is, in the terminal states and in the "Reset Sent"
state.

> A receiver could receive any of these three frames in any state, due to the

Reviewer 2: "these three frames" refers to something in another paragraph, so I think that your split should be reverted.

possibility of delayed delivery of packets carrying them.

The receiver of a stream sends MAX_STREAM_DATA ({{frame-max-stream-data}}) and
STOP_SENDING frames ({{frame-stop-sending}}).

The receiver only sends MAX_STREAM_DATA in the "Recv" state.  A receiver can
send STOP_SENDING in any state where it has not received a RST_STREAM frame;
that is states other than "Reset Recvd" or "Reset Read".  However there is
little value in sending a STOP_SENDING frame in the "Data Recvd" state, since
all stream data has been received.

A sender could receive either of these two frames in any state as a result of

> delayed delivery of packets.

Reviewer 2: Same as previous.

stream is in any state other than "Recv" or "Size Known" - sending a
STOP_SENDING frame is unnecessary.

An endpoint that wishes to terminate both directions of a bidirectional stream
can terminate one direction by sending a RST_STREAM, and it can encourage prompt
termination in the opposite direction by sending a STOP_SENDING frame.

# Flow Control {#flow-control}

> It is necessary to limit the amount of data that a receiver may have to buffer,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is necessary to limit the amount of data that a receiver could buffer,
```

> so as to prevent a fast sender from overwhelming a slow receiver, or to prevent

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to prevent a fast sender from overwhelming a slow receiver, or to prevent
```

  sent on any stream.

* Connection flow control, which prevents senders from exceeding a receiver's
  buffer capacity for the connection, by limiting the total bytes of stream data
  sent in STREAM frames on all streams.

A receiver sets initial credits for all streams by sending transport parameters
during the handshake ({{transport-parameters}}).  A receiver sends
MAX_STREAM_DATA ({{frame-max-stream-data}}) or MAX_DATA ({{frame-max-data}})
frames to the sender to advertise additional credit.

A receiver advertises credit for a stream by sending a MAX_STREAM_DATA frame
with the Stream ID set appropriately.  A MAX_STREAM_DATA frame indicates the
maximum absolute byte offset of a stream.  A receiver could use the current
offset of data consumed to determine the flow control offset to be advertised.
A receiver MAY send MAX_STREAM_DATA frames in multiple packets in order to make
sure that the sender receives an update before running out of flow control
credit, even if one of the packets is lost.

A receiver advertises credit for a connection by sending a MAX_DATA frame, which
indicates the maximum of the sum of the absolute byte offsets of all streams.  A

> receiver maintains a cumulative sum of bytes received on all contributing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
receiver maintains a cumulative sum of bytes received on all
```

resource commitment and overhead when determining how large a limit is
advertised.

A receiver MAY use an autotuning mechanism to tune the frequency and amount of

> advertised additional credit.

Reviewer 2: The cut here might be too much.  I'd say either cut the whole paragraph, or keep it.  I think keeping it is best.

If a sender runs out of flow control credit, it will be unable to send new data
and is considered blocked.  It is generally considered best to not let the

> sender go into quiescence.  To avoid blocking a sender, and to reasonably

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sender to become blocked.  To avoid blocking a sender, and to reasonably
```

account for the possibility of loss, a receiver should send a MAX_DATA or
MAX_STREAM_DATA frame at least two round trips before it expects the sender to
get blocked.

A receiver MUST NOT wait for a STREAM_DATA_BLOCKED or DATA_BLOCKED frame before
sending MAX_STREAM_DATA or MAX_DATA, since doing so will mean that a sender will
be blocked for at least an entire round trip, and potentially for longer if the
peer chooses to not send STREAM_DATA_BLOCKED or DATA_BLOCKED frames.

## Handling Stream Cancellation {#stream-cancellation}

> Given enough time, both endpoints must agree on flow control state, to avoid

Reviewer 2: Endpoints need to eventually agree on the amount of flow control credit that has been consumed, to avoid either exceeding limits or deadlocking.

to underfilled packets.

## Frame Priority {#frame-priority}

Often, there will be limits on what can be transmitted as a result of connection
flow control or the current congestion controller state.

Giving preference to the transmission of its own management functions ensures
that a protocol functions efficiently.  That is, prioritizing frames other than
STREAM frames ensures that loss recovery, congestion control, and flow control
operate effectively.

CRYPTO frames SHOULD be prioritized over STREAM frames prior to the completion

> of the cryptographic handshake.  This includes the retransmission of the second

Reviewer 2: You already effectively said this in the last paragraph, so I think that you might want to drop this paragraph.

Author: I think this paragraph is good to have since it is more specific. We can drop the previous paragraph, which is simply general advice.

When a Stream Data field has a length of 0, the offset in the STREAM frame is
the offset of the next byte that would be sent.

When new data is to be sent on a stream, a sender MUST set the encapsulating
STREAM frame's offset field to the stream offset of the first byte of this new
data.  The first byte in the stream has an offset of 0.  The largest offset

> delivered on a stream - the sum of the re-constructed offset and data length -

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
delivered on a stream - the sum of the offset and data length -
```
